DOC Clarify how mixed array input types handled in array api (#31452)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/array_api.rst

Coverage is expected to grow over time. Please follow the dedicated `meta-issue on GitHub
<https://github.com/scikit-learn/scikit-learn/issues/22352>`_ to track progress.

Input and output array type handling
------------------------------------

Estimators and scoring functions are able to accept input arrays
from different array libraries and/or devices. When mixed input arrays are

> passed, scikit-learn silently converted to make them all consistent.

Author: This is better, thank you

For estimators, the rule is **"everything follows `X`"** - mixed array inputs are

> converted so they are all match the array library and device of `X`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
converted so that they all match the array library and device of `X`.
```

For scoring functions the rule is **"everything follows `y_pred`"** - mixed array

> inputs are converted so they are all match the array library and device of `y_pred`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
inputs are converted so that they all match the array library and device of `y_pred`.
```

When a function or method has been called with Array API compatible inputs, the

> convention is to return array values of the same array container type and

Reviewer 2: I find the expression "array container type" (which is already in the sentence) quite vague. In other parts of the docs we have talked about "array library" and "array namespace", so maybe like that (?):

```suggestion
convention is to return a type from the same array library and
```

> convention is to return array values of the same array container type and

Author: Thanks all, I used:

```suggestion
convention is to return arrays from the same array library and on the same
device as the input data.
```

We rarely return more than one array but I went for plural. Suggestions welcome!

device as the input data.

> For details and reasons behind this choice, see below.

Reviewer 2: I believe that is not really needed here.

```suggestion
```

Estimators
~~~~~~~~~~

When an estimator is fitted with an Array API compatible `X`, all other
array inputs, including constructor arguments, (e.g., `y`, `sample_weight`,
`weights_init`) will be silently converted to match the array library and
device of `X`, if they do not already.
This allows estimators to accept mixed input types, enabling `X` to be moved
to a different device within a pipeline, without explicitly moving `y`.
Note that scikit-learn pipelines do not allow transformation of `y` (to avoid

> :ref:`leakage <data_leakage>`).

Author: Nice, changed to this!

Take for example a pipeline where `X` and `y` both start on CPU, and go through
the following three steps:

* :class:`~sklearn.preprocessing.TargetEncoder`, which will transform categorial
  `X` but also requires `y`, meaning both `X` and `y` need to be on CPU.

> * :class:`~sklearn.preprocessing.FunctionTransformer`, with the function
>   `partial(torch.asarray, device="cuda")`, which moves `X` to GPU, to improve

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if it renders correctly, but in my mind that's a bit more obvious (and spares people to look up the usage of `FunctionTransformer` before they can read on:

```suggestion
* :class:`~sklearn.preprocessing.FunctionTransformer`
  (func=partial(torch.asarray, device="cuda")), which moves `X` to GPU, to improve
```

Author: Tried using an 'explicit' title, lets see if it renders correctly...

  performance in the next step.
* :class:`~sklearn.linear_model.Ridge`, whose performance can be improved when

>   passed arrays on GPU, as it only takes numerical inputs.

Reviewer: "on GPU", "on a GPU", "on the GPU"? Not sure which one is right/sounds best (same applies to "on CPU" above) - do you have a preference?

>   passed arrays on GPU, as it only takes numerical inputs.

Reviewer 2: On "as it only takes numerical inputs": that is not making for improved performance in GPU compared to CPU. We could instead name an actual reason (some matrix computation going on within Ridge) or leave this out completely?

`X` initially contains categorical string data (thus needs to be on CPU), which is
target encoded to numerical values in :class:`~sklearn.preprocessing.TargetEncoder`.
`X` is then explicitly moved to GPU to improve the performance of
:class:`~sklearn.linear_model.Ridge`. `y` cannot be transformed by the pipeline
(recall scikit-learn pipelines do not allow transformation of `y`) but as
:class:`~sklearn.linear_model.Ridge` is able to accept mixed input types,

> this is not a problem and the pipeline is able to be run.

Author: > At first sight it seems that the y follows X principle here is broken and upon thinking about it, I could then see that this part is to demonstrate how y being on the different namespace on the beginning of a new step of a pipeline demonstrates exactly how it follows X without that the user needs to take care of it. But right now, there is only a very subtle hint on this in this paragraph and this idea is not clearly expressed.

@StefanieSenger this is the only part that explicit talks about this. I tried to make it clearer but open to suggests to improve. Thanks!

The fitted attributes of an estimator fitted with an Array API compatible `X`, will
be arrays from the same library as the input and stored on the same device.
The `predict` and `transform` method subsequently expect
inputs from the same array library and device as the data passed to the `fit`
method.

Scoring functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When an Array API compatible `y_pred` is passed to a scoring function,

> all other array inputs (e.g., `y_true`, `sample_weight`) will be silently converted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
all other array inputs (e.g., `y_true`, `sample_weight`) will be converted
```

to match the array library and device of `y_pred`, if they do not already.

> This allows scoring functions to accept mixed input types, which enables it to be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This allows scoring functions to accept mixed input types, which enables them to be
```

convention is to return array values of the same array container type and
device as the input data.

Estimators
~~~~~~~~~~

When an estimator is fitted with an Array API compatible `X`, all other

> array inputs (e.g., `y`, `sample_weight`) will be silently converted

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
array inputs including constructor arguments (e.g., `y`, `sample_weight`) 
will be silently converted
```

This case where constructor arguments can be arrays and needed to be converted into `X`'s namespace, we had encountered in #30777. I think it is worth mentioning here, because since they are created easlier, they are way more likely to be be passed from another namespace than something, passed into `fit` along with `X`.

to match the array library and device of `X`, if they do not already.
This allows estimators to accept mixed input types, enabling `X` to be moved

> to a different device within a pipeline, while `y` stays on the original device.

Reviewer 2: This is pretty unclear to me and I feel it needs some clarification. Here my guess of what this might mean?
```suggestion
to a different device within a pipeline, while `y` stays on the original device 
and is moved with `X` consecutively.
```

Author: I've amended that sentence, you're right, it could be improved.

:ref:`leakage <data_leakage>`).

Take for example a pipeline where `X` and `y` both start on CPU, and has
the following three steps:

* :class:`~sklearn.preprocessing.TargetEncoder`, which will work on categorial
  `X` but also requires `y`, meaning both `X` and `y` need to be on CPU.
* :class:`~sklearn.preprocessing.FunctionTransformer` to move `X` to GPU, to improve
  performance in the next step.
* :class:`~sklearn.linear_model.Ridge`, whose performance can be improved when
  passed arrays on GPU, as it only takes numerical inputs.

`y` and `X` both need to be on CPU for :class:`~sklearn.preprocessing.TargetEncoder`.
`X` is moved to GPU to improve the performance of :class:`~sklearn.linear_model.Ridge`
but `y` cannot be transformed. Since :class:`~sklearn.linear_model.Ridge` is able to
accept mixed input types, this is not a problem and the pipeline is able to be run.

The fitted attributes of an estimator fitted with an Array API compatible `X`, will
be arrays from the same library as the input and stored on the same device.
The `predict` and `transform` method subsequently expect
inputs from the same array library and device as the data passed to the `fit`

> method.

Author: Sorry I am confused here, why would an array library be doing things within our `predict` and `transform` methods? :thinking:

> method.

Author: Okay you've raised some good points :thinking: I'm going to raise these back in the issue
